\section{Genes in Regions of Anomalous GC Content}

Figure \ref{table:gc-regions} shows the results of applying the same
region finding process from earlier to segments of the genome
identified as AT-rich. In comparison to results from section (region
finding section), we see that there are far fewer predicted genes in
regions of AT-rich genomic sequence. In DC1 and Tsth20, there are only
42 and 13 genes predicted respectively. Of the regions with gene
predictions in AT-rich genomic sequence, there are only a few with
support from both Braker2 and GeneMark in DC1 and Tsth20. Again, in a
similar case to section (region finding section), there are no regions
with partial support as only two gene finding tools were applied to
those assemblies. \textit{T. reesei} and \textit{T. harzianum} report
more regions and genes in AT-rich genomic sequence than the other
assemblies, but with most regions belonging to the singleton
category. \textit{T. virens} is an interesting case, reporting a
similar numbers of regions and genes in AT-rich genomic sequence as
DC1 and Tsth20. Why \textit{T. virens} differs so greatly from the
other RefSeq assemblies is unclear. In general, gene finders predict
few genes in regions of AT-rich genomic sequence, and gene predictions
in those regions show a smaller proportion of fully supported regions
when compared to the AT-rich agnostic regions from section (region
finding section).

\begin{table}
  \begin{center}
    \begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|c|c|}
      \hline
      Assembly & Full Support & Partial Support & Singletons & No. Genes \\ \hline
      DC1 & 11 & N/A & 20 & 42  \\ \hline
      Tsth20 & 2 & N/A & 9 & 13  \\ \hline
      \textit{T. reesei} & 25 & 18 & 54 & 194  \\ \hline
      \textit{T. harzianum} & 26 & 43 & 68 & 265  \\ \hline
      \textit{T. virens} & 8 & 11 & 0 & 49  \\ \hline
    \end{tabular}
  \end{center}
  \caption[Agreement of predictions in anomalous GC regions.]{Total
    regions identified each assembly followed by counts of regions
    (both agreement and singletons) in regions of anomalous GC
    content.}
  \label{table:gc-regions}
\end{table}

In addition to a breakdown of regions in AT-rich genomic sequence,
understanding which gene finders predict more or fewer genes in these
regions may be of interest. Table \ref{table:gc-gene-counts} shows the
number of genes predicted by each gene finding tool in regions of
AT-rich genomic sequence. GeneMark appears to predict the fewest genes
in AT-rich regions, while RefSeq appears to predict the most. Braker2
lies somewhere in the middle. Again, \textit{T. virens} appears as an
odd case, with very few predictions from all gene finders. Why
\textit{T. virens} differs from the other RefSeq assemblies is
unclear.

\begin{table}
  \begin{center}
    \begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|c|}
      \hline
      Assembly & Braker2 & GeneMark & RefSeq \\ \hline
      DC1 & 31 & 11 & N/A \\ \hline
      Tsth20 & 11 & 2 & N/A \\ \hline
      \textit{T. reesei} & 39 & 48 & 107 \\ \hline
      \textit{T. harzianum} & 81 & 30 & 154 \\ \hline
      \textit{T.virens} & 21 & 8 & 20 \\ \hline
    \end{tabular}
  \end{center}
  \caption{Number of genes predicted by Braker2, GeneMark and RefSeq
    in AT-rich genomic sequence from each assembly.}
  \label{table:gc-gene-counts}
\end{table}

Finally, to test the probability of any given gene prediction falling
in an AT-rich genomic sequence, a two-sided binomial test was
performed to determine if the number of genes predicted in AT-rich
sequences is proportional to fraction of genomic sequence they
comprise. The results of the test are shown in table
\ref{table:gc-binomial}. In all cases, it appears that the gene
finding tools selected for this analysis do not predict the same
proportion of genes in AT-rich genomic sequence as in typical genomic
sequence.

\begin{table}
  \begin{center}
    \begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|c|c|c|}
      \hline
      Tool & DC1 & Tsth20 & \textit{T. reesei} & \textit{T. harzianum} & \textit{T. virens} \\ \hline
      Braker2 & $9.56^{-181}$ & $1.14^{-259}$ & $2.68^{-96}$ & $4.05^{-140}$ & $1.35^{-35}$ \\ \hline
      GeneMark & $5.12^{-216}$ & $0.0$ & $5.66^{-49}$ & $5.37^{-219}$ & $5.31^{-35}$ \\ \hline
      RefSeq & N/A & N/A & $1.29^{-49}$ & $2.44^{-205}$ & $7.40^{-33}$ \\ \hline
    \end{tabular}
  \end{center}
  \caption{\textit{p} values produced from a two-sided binomial test
    for each combination of tool and assembly.}
  \label{table:gc-binomial}
\end{table}

In summary, very few genes are predicted by these gene finding tools
in AT-rich genomic sequences. Additionally genes predicted in these
regions tend to be isolated and not supported by other gene finders,
although there is some agreement. In terms of `performance', RefSeq
tends to predict the most genes in these AT-rich regions while
GeneMark predicts the fewest. Lastly, the selected gene finding tools
do not predict genes in AT-rich sequences in proportion to the
fraction of genomic sequence they comprise.
