\section{Overview}

Results from this work are ordered in a particular manner relative to
the order in which data was processed. Since there are novel
\textit{Trichoderma} assemblies included in this work, the results
begin with an overview of the assemblies of DC1 and Tsth20 in Section
\ref{section:assemblies}. Following this, is Section
\ref{section:profiling}, which discusses the installation, application
and other features associated with the gene finders selected for this
work. Results of the initial gene finding process are then presented
in Section \ref{section:gene-finding} followed by more detailed
analysis of predicted CDS lengths in Section
\ref{section:lengths}. Gene predictions from each gene finder and
assembly combination are supplied to the BUSCO metric process in
Section \ref{section:busco}. Results from the initial spatial
comparison of gene predictions using the region identification process
are then presented in Section \ref{section:regions}. The region
identification process is then applied with additional information
from tblastn alignments, InterProScan annotation, and GC sequence
composition in Sections \ref{section:interproscan},
\ref{section:blast} and \ref{section:gc-regions}, respectively. A
final comparison of all results and selection of an appropriate gene
finder are then discussed in the Conclusion \ref{chapter:conclusion}.

RefSeq assemblies in these results are referred to by their scientific
name for context and not by their associated NCBI accession
IDs. Instead, NCBI accessions for the RefSeq assemblies and their
associated annotations are listed here: \textit{T. reesei} -
GCF\_000167675.1\_v2.0, \textit{T. harzianum} -
GCF\_003025095.1\_Triha\_v1.0, GCF\_000170995.1\_TRIVI\_v2.0.
