\section{Genomics}
Genomics is a wide area of study focusing on the genomes of organisms
from all varieties of life. A genome is a sequence of characters that
contains the fundamental set of `rules' used to create what we know as
life. One can think of a genome as a set of instructions that our
cells use in order to complete the tasks that make us function. A
genome is comprised of tightly bundled sequences of DNA, which are
stored in the nucleus of cells. These bundles of DNA contain sections
known as genes, which can be thought of as the tools described by the
set of instructions. These tools carry out a vast number of processes
ranging from no known function at all to genes that are key in
protecting against diseases cancer. Genomes can vary widely in size,
ranging from small bacterial genomes of roughly 4 Mb up to
approximately 149000 Mb. Piecing together genomes provides numerous
opportunities to understand other `omics' within cells, such as
proteomics, metabolomics, transcriptomics and epigenomics.

\section{Sequencing}
Sequencing data is a pivotal form of data used in nearly all
applications of Bioinformatics. To understand the processes used by
organisms for survival, we must have an initial set of data points to
work with. These sequences, referred to as reads after sequencing, are
the foundation for solving problems ranging from taxonomical
classification to the understanding or complex biological functions
like signaling pathways. Reads may come in a variety of forms and
formats depending on the desired application.

\section{Whole Genome Shotgun Sequencing}
Whole Genome Shotgun sequencing (WGS), is a method to produce a large
number of genomic sequences from a sample of interest for the purpose
of genome asembly. This is form of sequencing is quite common as it is
has a wide variety of applications in research~\cite{Adams2008}. WGS
involves slicing up genomic DNA into smaller segments. These small
segments are then processed further resulting in a set of physical
molecules that can be supplied to a compatible sequencing platform of
which there are a variety. Modern sequencing platforms are comprised
of next generation sequencing (NGS) and 3rd generation sequencing
approaches.

\section{Next Generation Sequencing - Illumina}
Illumina\texttrademark ~\cite{Bennett2004} sequencing is one of the
most popular NGS platforms currently available. Illumina sequencing
produces a very large number of high quality short reads, typically
between 75 and 250 base pairs in length. Sequencing libraries can be
prepared to produce reads solely from one end of a sequence fragment
(single-end) or both ends (paired-end). Advantages of paired end
sequences are the additional context provided by the paired sequence
on the opposite end of the fragment. This context is leveraged by read
processing tools to identify features such as repetitive regions and
genomic rearrangments, which can be significant in downstream
analyses. Illumina sequence librairies are generated by first
fragmenting the DNA samples, amplifying them via PCR, ligating
adapters that allow the sequence to bind to the sequencing plate, and
finally identifying each fragment's sequence of nucleotides using
fluorescently-labeled nucleotides that bind to the
fragments~\cite{Goodwin2016}.

\section{3rd Generation Sequencing - Nanopore}

Nanopore\texttrademark ~\cite{Wang2021} sequencing data is relatively
recent approach to sequencing projects. While Illumina reads are
short, Nanopore reads are much larger, ranging from 10Kb to 300Kb
depending on the approach used. Long reads are beneficial due to their
ability to bridge the gaps between difficult to assemble regions when
performing sequence assembly. An example of a difficult to assemble
region would be a region with a high repeat content, where a large
number of small repeats may be collapsed during the assembly process,
resulting in an assembly that does not represent the true nature of
the sequence being studied~\cite{Marx2023}. While Nanopore was
previously known for having lower quality base calls when compared to
Illumina, that is no longer the case at this time. Nanopore sequencing
works by passing long segments of genetic sequence through a membrane
bound protein and measuring changes in electrical current, which is
characteristic of the nucleotide at a given position.

\section{Secondary Metabolites}

While cellular products essential to an organism's viability are
of great interest, there are a vast number of products that are not
essential, but provide great benefit to the
organism\cite{Craney2013}\cite{Mukherjee2012}. These other cellular products are known as secondary metabolites, and they are involved in several roles ranging from cellular signalling to antibiotic activity, making them a frequent subject of study in pharmaceutical research. Enzymes that produce secondary metabolites are comprised of non-ribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPS) and polyketide synthetases (PKS), which synthesize amino acids and other basic enzymatic building blocks\cite{Komaki2020}. Genes responsible for the production of secondary metabolites are often found in clusters within a genome, but their products remain unknown\cite{Mukherjee2012}. The study of these products is difficult, as many genes responsible for secondary metabolites are not expressed under normal laboratory conditions\cite{Mukherjee2012}.  Secondary metabolites are commonly found in both bacteria and fungi, and of particular interest to this work, \textit{Trichoderma} species and their interactions with plants.


\section{Non-ribosomal Peptide Synthetases}

Non-ribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPS) are a class of enzymes that


\section{Polyketide Synthetases}


\section{\textit{Trichoderma}}

\textit{Trichoderma} are a genus of ascomycete fungi found in a wide
variety of soils, and are well-known for their use in biomanufacturing
of cellulases and hemicellulases and their roles as non-toxic,
avirulent opportunistic plant
symbionts\cite{Woo2023}\cite{Kubicek2019}. It is believed that
\textit{Trichoderma} initally evolved as a parasite or saprotroph of
plants, due to their abundant production of cellulases and plant wall
degrading enzymes\cite{Kubicek2019}. In addition to saprotrophy,
\textit{Trichoderma} species are also mycoparasitic, feeding on other
Ascomycete and closely related fungal
species\cite{Druzhinina2018}. \textit{Trichoderma} comprises a large
number of species with several large clades.

In addition to these beneficial properties some strains  \textit{Trichoderma} is a
well studied . Many strains of \textit{Trichoderma} have been shown to
provide resistance to pathogenic bacteria and other fungi in soils
through the use of polyketides, non-ribosomal peptide synthetases and
other secondary metabolites\cite{Woo2023} (SMs). Despite growing
knowledge and study of these SMs, the mechanisms behind their function
are still unclear\cite{Baker2012}, especially in the case of new
\textit{Trichoderma} species and strains.

Crop resistance to environmental stressors is a necessity for crop
health and overall crop yields. Current popular methods for crop
protection involve the use of pesticides and genetically modified
organisms, which can be expensive and potentially politically dividing
in the case of GMOs\cite{doi:10.1080/10408390600762696}. In addition,
crops suffer when soils are not sufficient for crop growth and
health. Soil insufficiencies can result in drought stress as well as
nutrient stress, leading to poor overall yields.

\section{Novel \textit{Trichoderma} Genomes}

Recently, two strains of \textit{Trichoderma}
have been identified in the prairie regions of Alberta and
Saskatchewan. These two strains, named Tsth20 and DC1, have been found
to have beneficial properties when used as an inoculant for plants in
the soils mentioned before. In addition to these beneficial
properties, the two strains mentioned previously provide even further
protection for plants in dry, salty soils and one strain also has
potential for use as a bioremediation tool in soils contaminated with
hydrocarbon content. Bioremediation and resistance to drought
tolerance has also been investigated in other strains of
\textit{Trichoderma} as well\cite{10.3389/fpls.2023.1190304}. However,
little is known about the mechanisms at work in these strains, so DC1
and Tsth20 were sequenced by the Global Institute for Food Security
(no publication yet) in an initial attempt to better understand the
details of these genomes. While this research does not directly
identify genomic elements related the beneficial properties of these
genomes, it may serve as a foundation for future research of
\textit{Trichoderma}.

\section{Genome Assembly}

Sequence assembly has been a long-standing problem in the field of
bioinformatics\cite{Nagarajan2013}. Determining the correct order and
combination of smaller subsequences into an accurate complete sequence
assembly is computationally difficult in terms of compute resources
such as memory, CPU cycles and storage required for input
sequences\cite{Nagarajan2013}. In addition to these difficulties,
there can be other issues encountered during asssembly due to the
nature of the data or genomes themselves, such as low quality base
calls for long read data, which is not necessarily the case today, or
the inherent content of genomes themselves using repetitive regions as
an example. Insufficient data may result in short, fragmented
assemblies, depending on the size of the genomes, while sequence data
that is not long enough can fail to fully capture repetitive regions
in an assembly. A wide range of assembly tools have been developed
with their own unique approaches to the genome assembly problem, so it
is important to use an appropriate assembler for the task at hand, and
also important to evaluate the assembly thoroughly.

Genome assembly tools generally approach the assembly problem using a
graph-based approach. The most common graph-based approach is the de
Bruijn graph assembly~\cite{Compeau2011}. A graph in this context, is
set of nodes (\textit{k}-mers from sequences) connected by edges
(overlaps between \textit{k}-mers). Traversing through this graph
results in longer subsequences that ultimately result in a set of
sequences referred to as an assembly. In the early years of long read
sequence data, sequencing platforms encountered difficulties producing
consistently high scores for base calls when sequencing. To combat
this, some assembly workflows may also include a polishing or
correction step once the initial assembly is completed in which high
quality short read sequences are used as supplemental information to
correct low quality regions in the assembly. These low quality base
calls are typically not present in modern long read sequencing
approaches as the methodology and quality of calls have improved
drastically. While the polishing step is arguably unnecessary in
modern assemblies, the polishing programs remain available should
researchers be interested in applying additional reads for polishing.

One approach to aid in the previously mentioned issue of assembly
correctness is to use a combination of long and short reads in what is
known as a hybrid assembly. Combining both highly accurate short reads
with deep coverage along with less accurate but much longer reads can
produce high quality genome assemblies that capture long repetitive
regions. Hybrid assembly approaches have been shown to produce high
quality assemblies in a wide variety of organisms as the combine long
read data with short data to produce assemblies that properly
represent long repetetive regions with additionaly high quality
Illumina sequences for correction. Once assembled, the sequences must
also be evaluated with measures such as N50, L50, coverage, average
contig length and total assembled length to ensure that the genomes
are well assembled, at least based on these
metrics\cite{Nagarajan2013}. Following appropriate assembly protocols
is essential to the further success of a project as downstream
processing such as annotation depends on a high-quality assembly.

\section{Identification of Anomolous Genomic regions}
One important aspect of interest when assembling any form of sequence
is GC content or percent GC of the assembled sequence. Large regions
of anomolous GC content may be of interest to researchers as they may
contain repetitive regions and unique features responsible for traits
specific to the organism in question.

\section{Repeat Identification and Masking}
Repeat identification within assembled genomes is a problem that needs
to be considered during the genome annotation process. Regions with
long repeats can have a significant impact on genome assembly as well
as gene finding due to the limitation of short reads used in some
assemblies\cite{Treangen2011}. Short reads may be unable to bridge or
cover entire repeat regions within a genome, so it is important to
consider the use of long reads from technologies such as Nanopore or
PacBio\texttrademark \cite{Rhoads2015} to provide a complete picture of
these regions when pursuing a new genome assembly project. It is also
possible for repetitive regions to contain genes as well, making for
an interesting investigation in regards to \textit{Trichoderma}, as
fungal genomes have been shown to contain many repeat regions with a
high concentration of A and T
nucleotides\cite{10.1371/journal.pgen.1007467}. Once these repetitive
regions have been identified, the genome could be masked as a method
to mark these regions for downstream processing if desired, as these
regions may be poorly assembled and may result in found genes that do
not truly exist in those regions. However, this may not be as common
today, as repetetive regions have been shown to contain genes as
well\cite{Slotkin2018}. This may affect the gene finding process
described later and may be an interesting topic to look into
considering the large number of available gene finding programs.

\section{Centromere Identification}
A centromere is a region of a chromosome that is crucial for the
proper cell division. These regions are the main anchor for
microtubules, which are fibers that attach to centromeres to separate
chromosomes during both mitosis and meiosis. Centromeres are critical
to the survival of an organism, with malfunctions in the process of
cell division usually resulting in potential disease and fatal
outcomes\cite{Plohl2014}. Centromeric sequences can be comprised of
several different genetic components, with repetititve regions being
the most prevalent in the forms of satellite DNA and transposable
elements. In addition to centromeric regions, there are flanking
pericentric regions with their own properties, including potential
candidates for small-interfering RNAs\cite{Plohl2014}. Identification
and consideration of centromeric regions may prove useful when
comparing the outputs of gene finding tools, as the underlying
properties and structure of the genetic sequence differ in comparison
to typical coding regions of DNA.

\section{Gene Finding Methods}
Gene finding (or gene annotation) has been a long standing
computational problem in bioinformatics, which concerns itself with
identifying potential genes within assemblies based on patterns or
pre-existing experimental evidence considered by the gene finding
program. This process is critical for unraveling and understanding the
complex processes occurring in all forms of life. In a general sense,
gene finding programs operate by searching for patters or indicators
showing that a gene of feature may be present. The most basic
indicators being start and stop codons, with splice sites in
between should the sequence match the applied model. The results
produced by gene finding tools can vary considerably for a number of
reasons, including quality of the assembly, the intrinsic model used
by the gene finder, filtering criteria, and even the nature of the
organism and assembly itself. Given the broad applications, choice of
gene finding tools, and the variability of assemblies being
considered, it is important that we gain a deeper understanding of
these tools prior to putting them to use.

There are two common methods for gene finding, those methods being
\textit{ab initio} methods, where programs search for patterns and
gene structures, and similarity or evidence-based searches, which use
prior information such as RNAseq data, expressed sequence tags and
expressd protein sequences to identify genes within a new
genome\cite{Ejigu2020}. Complicating the process more is the
introduction of introns and alternative splicing in eukaryotes, making
it possible for one gene to have several possible transcripts at the
same locus. An example of an \textit{ab initio} method would be
GeneMark-ES\cite{10.1093/nar/gki937}, while an evidence based tool
would be Braker2\cite{Bruna2021}.
\textit{Ab initio} gene finders typically predict genes using a Hidden
Markov Model (HMM)\cite{Ejigu2020}. These predictions are based on
`signals' or features associated with a gene, such as the usual start,
stop, exon and intron portions of a gene as well as upstream promoter
sequences and more. In this case, these signals would be considered
states in the terminology associated with HMMs. Gene finders wish to
predict these states based on observations, or sequences presented to
the model. HMMs in gene finding tools are trained beforehand and then
applied to a sequence. This means that a gene finding program may not
be trained in the context of any assembly provided to it, and thus may
miss genes that are unique to the assembly in question.
On the other hand, while still relying on HMMs for a `base' set of
predictions, evidence-based gene finding tools leverage new evidence
that may be outside the scope of the pre-existing
model\cite{Keller2011}.  As an example, an evidence-based model would
be useful in a situation where you are interested in annotating a new
assembly for a non-model organism. The addition of experimental data
provides context specific to your assembly of interest while still
retaining the predictions from existing HMM models.

There are also other aspects of gene finding tools that are important
to consider. These include features such as whether or not the gene
finders find non-coding RNAs, annotation of 5' and 3' UTR regions, and
in the case of ab-initio methods, the assumptions made by the
underlying models used for gene finding. These features and others can
influence a user's decision on which gene finding tool to consider and
will complicate comparative analysis of multiple gene finding
tools. (citation needed somewhere in here)

\section{RefSeq}

First, we will briefly discuss the RefSeq annotation process. RefSeq
annotation is only applied to data that is submitted to NCBI. The
RefSeq Eukaryotic Genome Annotation Pipeline\cite{NCBI2024} is a
genome annotation process developed and maintained by NCBI. The
pipeline is not directly publicly available to public users, and
requires submission of data to NCBI. Once data is submitted to NCBI,
the RefSeq annotation pipeline may be applied upon request only if the
genome is the highest quality assembly for the species in question or
if the genome is of significant interest to the scientific community,
limiting reach of the annotation process to many users. The pipeline
supplies existing RNAseq, CDS and protein sequences to NCBI's in-house
gene prediction tool Gnomon, which produces trained models for gene
prediction. While the tools used for alignment and processing of
supporting sequence information are listed, the inner workings of
Gnomon are not well documented, at least from the public perspective,
and I was unable to find Gnomon in any compilable or executable form
during my search. Recreation of the RefSeq pipeline would prove
extremely challenging if not impossible without supporting
information. Run times for this pipeline are difficult to determine
due to the hidden nature of the pipeline, unknown compute resources
and varying quantities of data used. The RefSeq annotation process
produces comprehensive outputs, including CDS sequences, translated
CDS, RNA from genomic sequences, proteins, feature counts and tables,
and finally GFF and GTF formatted annotation files for these features.

\section{InterProScan}
The outputs from gene finding tools are a set of potential genes that
fit the model used by each tool. While they are considered genes, the
use of the word gene is used in a very loose sense, in that these
genes may or may not be functional or match any existing gene
sequences from previous research. Typically, to confirm the
'correctness' of predicted genes, the outputs from a given tool are
used in a sequence similarity search against a reference set of genes
or a large datasbase comprised of multiple organisms. This approach is
straightforward, but can introduce bias from database choice and also
allows for vague or loose matches, depending on the parameters used
and the interpretation of the results. Another approach is to use
InterProScan, which is a tool used for functional annotation of
proteins using evidence from a variety of databases
\cite{10.1093/nar/gkac993}. The presence of some form of functional
domain or annotated structure in a predicted gene sequence is
reasonable evidence for the existence of a predicted gene. This
approach also avoids the problems associated with similarity-based
approaches.


\section{File Formats}

\subsection{FASTA}
One of the most popular formats for sequences of DNA, RNA and amino
acids is the FASTA format. The FASTA format consists of one or more
entries containing two or more lines. The first line of an entry is
the ID line, which must begin with a greater-than (\textgreater)
character, followed by an ID and any other pertinent inormation for
the following sequence. The greater-than character is the indicator
that a new sequence has begun. The following line(s) contain the
actual sequenced nucleotides or amino acids, which can be contained on
one line or split across many lines. An example of multiple FASTA
entries are shown in figure~\ref{fig:fasta-example}.

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{figures/fasta-example.png}
  \caption{Example of two FASTA sequence entries. One example with
    sequence characters split across multiple lines, and one showing
    all sequence characters on the same line.}
  \label{fig:fasta-example}
\end{figure}

\subsection{FASTQ}
Another popular sequencing format is the FASTQ format. This format is
very similar to the FASTA format but with the addition of two more
lines per sequence entry and a change to the character indicating the
beginning of a new sequence entry. An example of a FASTQ entry is
shown in figure~\ref{fig:fastq-example}. In FASTQ formatted entries,
the greater-than (\textgreater) character is swapped with the at (@)
character. The IDs for the sequence also follow a specific format,
which provide information about the sequencing run and flowcell that
the read was sequenced on. This information can then be traced back to
the sequencing experiment in the case that there were errors or
anomalies in the output from the experiment. Following the ID is the
string of base calls. The third line in a FASTQ entry is a plus (+)
character, which indicates that the sequences character line has
finished. Following the plus character is another sequence of
characters, this time indicatintg the quality of basecall for the
corresponding nucleotide base calls in the second line. The quality
information included in FASTQ files are used to assess the quality of
a sequencing run and extensively used in downstream processing steps,
most notably in alignments.

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{figures/fastq-example.png}
  \caption{Example of the four lines in a FASTQ entry.}
  \label{fig:fastq-example}
\end{figure}

\subsection{General Feature Format - GFF}
General feature format (GFF) is a popular format for storing
information about features relative to a position on an genetic
sequence, and comprises a large portion of annotation results from
this work. These features can be whatever the user desires, as long as
the feature entry follows the required GFF guidelines. Relative to a
reference sequence, each GFF entry contains the following
tab-delimited columns: sequence ID, source, feature type, start
position, end position, score, strand, phase, and a semi-colon
delimited list of attributes. GFF files are widely supported accross
bioinformatics tools, making them highly versatile while also
remaining relatively simple in nature but also allowing for storage of
more complicated items via the attributes column. One significatn
useage of GFF files is in visualization of features against the
reference sequence from which they were derived. Most genome viewers
(or browsers) support GFF files as input, allowing intuitive
visualization of many features when overlayed on a reference
sequence. An example of a GFF entry can be seen in
figure~\ref{fig:gff-example}.

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{figures/gff-example.png}
  \caption{An example of GFF entries for a single gene.}
  \label{fig:gff-example}
\end{figure}

\section{BLAST and tblastn}
The basic local	alignment search tool (BLAST)\ref{Altschul1990}	has
been a popular tool in the bioinformatics space, used to align
biological sequences and measure their similarity. The original	blast
program was developed for alignment of nucleotide sequences, but other
blast tools have been developed as well. One of these tools is tblastn
which was developed to align reverse-translated protein sequences to
another nucleotide sequence. To align the protein sequences, the query
nucleotide sequences are translated in all six reading frames and then
aligned to the proteins.  Tblastn is particularly useful for
identifying functional or conserved proteins in	a nucleotide sequence.

\section{BUSCO}
The Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologs
(BUSCO)\ref{10.1093/bioinformatics/btv351} tool was developed to
evaulate assemblies and subsequent annotations from the perspective of
gene orthology. As genomes diverge evolutionarily, it is expected that
some genes will be conserved as they are required for basic
function. The BUSCO (Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologs)
tool and datasets were developed to assess completeness of an
annotation in comparison to evolutionarily conserved genes.
